# IID_PPV_ARGS

This is that expands into two arguments being passed instead of one, it will also check that the pointer passed in derives from `IUnknown`.

```cpp
#define IID_PPV_ARGS(ppType) __uuidof(**(ppType)), IID_PPV_ARGS_Helper(ppType)
```

`__uuidof` is a Microsoft extension that will find the UUID associated with a particular type.

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/api/combaseapi/nf-combaseapi-iid_ppv_args

# Create device (and the debug layer)

Not very interesting. Create a window, create a device but before we do that we enable the debug layer. The debug layer can also do GPU-based validation not possible on the CPU.

When you enable the debug layer you will see API calls go through the debug layer stack.

When you enable GPU-based validation you will see validation code injected into your shaders.

As you might expect, extra validation has cost associated with it and you should enable it when you are testing/debugging and not otherwise.

You can read more about the debug layer [https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/direct3d12/using-d3d12-debug-layer-gpu-based-validation](here).

# Asynchronicity

This isn't really different from OpenGL. You issue a command (from client) and eventually the server will process this command. If you need to access some resource later you need a barrier. If you don't coordinate reading and writing you get garbage as a result.

# Command list

Everything that needs to get done are done via command lists. These are lists of commands that are meant to execute later, in the order they are recorded.

You can create as many command lists as you want but you can only "write to" or record commands into a command list from a single thread at a time. If you want to record commands from multiple threads you should create multiple command lists.

Command lists can be reused but you must wait for the most recently submitted work to completed first. This will require synchronization.

Command lists are represented by the `ID3D12GraphicsCommandList` interface.

There are two types of command lists.

- Direct command lists
- Bundles

Bundles support a subset of the command list features and is meant to be a template of sorts. You can create a bundle to represent a common set of operations on the command list and repeat these more efficiently. According to the DX12 documentation bundles exist to improve CPU use when it is not possible to use multiple threads/command lists.

Submitting a command list is done via the command queue (`ID3D12CommandQueue`) associated with the device.

> 🧶 Any thread may submit a command list to any command queue at any time, and the runtime will automatically serialize submission of the command list in the command queue while preserving the submission order.

# Command queue ("this should probably not be it's own section")

You can read more about how to setup a command queue [here](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/direct3d12/executing-and-synchronizing-command-lists#initializing-a-command-queue).

You can create dedicated command queues that only accept compute or copy commands. The default is called direct and will accept any command.

To execute a command list you call `ID3D12CommandQueue::ExecuteCommandLists`. If the command list is not valid for submission it will be dropped (which I assume mean it may generate an error but it won't crash and it won't prevent other command lists from being submitted/executed).

Command lists are associated with command allocators. If the command allocator has been reset or if the command list has not been closed it will fail to submit.

# Command queue fences

A fence is a logical clock (or monotonic time) that is incremented by 1 each time the command list is completed.

We can think of this as two timelines.

```
CPU 1      2       3         4
GPU       1       2   3       4
```

When working with the DX12 fence, there are two APIs to consider.

There's the `ID3D12Fence::Signal` used to set the fence value on the CPU-side.
There's the `ID3D12CommandQueue::Signal` used to set the fence value on the GPU-side.

`ID3D12Fence::Signal` is used to set the fence from the CPU-side. This is for more rare use case?

`ID3D12CommandQueue::Signal` will set the fence to the supplied value when the GPU reaches this point. i.e. when all previously submitted command lists have finished executing the fence will take on this value.

`ID3D12CommandQueue::Signal` inserts a way for you to be notified when the GPU has completed all the submitted work.

This is just like event sourcing. Each change is associated with with a monotonic value (a value that is only incremented). When we prepare work for submission we associate all that work with a fence value from our monotonic source.

```cpp
ID3D12Device*       dx12_device;
ID3D12Fence*        dx12_fence;
ID3D12CommandQueue* dx12_queue;
HANDLE              evt;

// This is our monotonic source of ever increasing fence values
u64 fence_value = 0;

// Initially the fence value will be zero (nothing to coordinate)
dx12_device->CreateFence(0, D3D12_FENCE_FLAG_NONE, IID_PPV_ARGS(&dx12_fence));

// This is an initially unsignaled auto-reset Win32 event
evt = CreateEvent(nullptr, FALSE, FALSE, nullptr);

for (;;) {
  // If the fence value is non zero we have something to coordinate.
  if (0 < fence_value) {
      // If the GPU is lagging behind. We need to wait for it to catch up...
    if (!(dx12_fence->GetCompletedValue() < fence_value)) {
      dx12_fence->SetEventOnCompletion(fence_value, evt);
      WaitForSingleObject(evt, INFINITE);
    }
  }

  dx12_queue->ExecuteCommandLists(...);
  dx12_queue->Signal(dx12_fence, ++fence_value);
}
```

Don't get fooled by the simple example above. The fence value doesn't have to increase by just 1 per frame like here. It is quite reasonable to think that we may have multiple such "synchronization points" in our render code.

The guarantee is simply that when a fence has been signaled, we will have reached this point in the shader programs. There may still be additional synchronization required to access the output from the shader programs, I think.

# Resource barriers

A resource barrier is not an object. It is simply an insertion into the command queue that a particular resource should have passed some barrier.

For example all DX12 apps have a resource barrier entry in the render pass to transition the render target from the present (or common) state to the render target state. You cannot render to it otherwise.

```cpp
ID3D12Resource* render_taget;

D3D12_RESOURCE_BARRIER barrier;
barrier.Type                   = D3D12_RESOURCE_BARRIER_TYPE_TRANSITION;
barrier.Flags                  = D3D12_RESOURCE_BARRIER_FLAG_NONE;
barrier.Transition.pResource   = render_taget;
barrier.Transition.Subresource = D3D12_RESOURCE_BARRIER_ALL_SUBRESOURCES;
barrier.Transition.StateBefore = D3D12_RESOURCE_STATE_PRESENT;
barrier.Transition.StateAfter  = D3D12_RESOURCE_STATE_RENDER_TARGET;

ID3D12GraphicsCommandList* command_list;

command_list->ResourceBarrier(1, &barrier);
```

Similarly, when we're done rendering to the render target we transition it back into the present state from the render target state.

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/direct3d12/using-resource-barriers-to-synchronize-resource-states-in-direct3d-12

# Swap chain

To create a swap chain you need a `DXGIFactory`.

You then use a swap chain descriptor to create a swap chain for the window you want to present to via `IDXGIFactory2::CreateSwapChainForHwnd`.

You can use `SetMaximumFrameLatency` and `GetFrameLatencyWaitableObject` to control how many frames are allowed to be rendered a head of time. I'm not sure why you would render more than 1 frame ahead as this is not about double buffering because a swap chain with just 1 render target is still not going to tear? or is it?

> Triple buffering is another approach that provides a balance, allowing the GPU to keep rendering to a third buffer even if the other two are waiting for the V-Sync.

# Descriptor heaps

Initialization of DX12 requires descriptor heaps. This is linear memory where the layout information for memory access can be found.

At minimum we need a descriptor heap for the render targets.

This is somewhat perplexing because it is so basic but the DX12 authors opted for consistency and flexibility which was probably a good decision.

```cpp
ID3D12Device* dx12_device;

D3D12_DESCRIPTOR_HEAP_DESC desc = {};

desc.Type           = D3D12_DESCRIPTOR_HEAP_TYPE_RTV;
desc.NumDescriptors = GFX_BACK_BUFFER_COUNT;
desc.Flags          = D3D12_DESCRIPTOR_HEAP_FLAG_NONE;

ID3D12DescriptorHeap* dx12_rtv_desc_heap;

dx12_device->CreateDescriptorHeap(&desc, IID_PPV_ARGS(&dx12_rtv_desc_heap));

// And then you have this ridiculous piece of code

enum {
  FRAME_BUFFER_COUNT = 3
};

D3D12_CPU_DESCRIPTOR_HANDLE rtv_offsets[FRAME_BUFFER_COUNT];

SIZE_T rtv_desc_size = dx12_device->GetDescriptorHandleIncrementSize(D3D12_DESCRIPTOR_HEAP_TYPE_RTV);
D3D12_CPU_DESCRIPTOR_HANDLE rtv_base = dx12_rtv_desc_heap->GetCPUDescriptorHandleForHeapStart();
for (UINT i = 0; i < FRAME_BUFFER_COUNT; i++) {
  rtv_offsets[i] = rtv_base;
  rtv_base.ptr += rtv_desc_size;
}
```

I only think this is hilarious because we're not doing anything but computing offsets to the RTVs with information from the DX12 API. This by itself doesn't do anything. I guess we've avoided 1 level of indirection... 🤷

Maybe RTV descriptor heaps are just meant to be this boring.

Later in our initialization of DX12 we do this to setup the RTVs.

```cpp
ID3D12Device*   dx12_device;
ID3D12Resource* back_buffer;
IDXGISwapChain* swap_chain;

for (UINT i = 0; i < FRAME_BUFFER_COUNT; i++) {
  // index based
  swap_chain->GetBuffer(i, IID_PPV_ARGS(&back_buffer));

  // offset based
  dx12_device->CreateRenderTargetView(back_buffer, nullptr, rtv_offsets[i]);
}
```

# Root signatures

Root signatures are like interface blocks in OpenGL. They just tell us where the uniform shader inputs and outputs are.

# Resource heaps

Resource heaps are like containers for resource objects. They do allow explicit layout but this is optional. Resource heaps react to what resources you put in them. If you add a resource to a resource heap you are committing/reserving memory for this resource there. When you remove the resource from the heap that memory can be used for something else.

# The first draw command

Since I have some experience with OpenGL I will reference OpenGL here in order to map OpenGL to DirectX 12 where applicable.

Getting a triangle to display on screen is not that different from modern OpenGL.

To drawing anything you need the following

- Buffer (vertex/index/etc.)
- Shader
- Pipeline state
- Root signature

These form a unit.

The buffers hold the data. This is probably the most unsurprising part.

The shader is your actual program code, or shader code that will get executed on the GPU.

The root signature is similar to the OpenGL interface block. It is the contract between the CPU and GPU. How the shader code will access data.

The pipeline state ties everything together. Bindless OpenGL does this to some extent but it is very convenient to have all your pipeline state in a single place.
